How often do you do psychedelics? Oh,
not very often at all. You know, it's
hard to find time.
>> [laughter and gasps]
[music]
>> For as long as I can remember, I've
wrestled with my own thoughts and
feelings about identity, who I am and
why. So, I think it's no coincidence
>> [music]
>> that I've also always been interested in
the subject of consciousness.
The best-selling author Michael Pollan
has been thinking about some of the same
things, too. [music]
He's always written about the
relationship between the mind and the
body, from why we eat the way we do to
the science of psychedelics. [music]
But, his new book jumps into the deep
end. It's called A World Appears: A
Journey into Consciousness. [music]
It's a highly personal exploration of
human consciousness, what it is, where
it comes from, and why that
understanding actually matters [music]
in our daily lives. Here's my
conversation with Michael Pollan.
>> [music]
>> Michael, thank you for taking the time
to speak with me today. I appreciate it.
>> A pleasure to be here, David.
Um, so so I just want to get to some
some get to some basics for people. How
do you define consciousness?
Yeah, it's a slippery word and a
slippery topic. Um, the simplest way to
define consciousness is simply as
experience or subjective experience. Uh,
another one-word definition is
awareness.
Um, many people in the field
rely on a It's sort of a definition, um,
but Thomas Nagel, the NYU philosopher
wrote a piece back in the early '70s, a
wonderful essay called What Is It Like
to Be a Bat.
And his his idea is if we can imagine
it is like anything to be a bat,
then a bat is conscious because that
means it has some sort of subjective
experience.
And, um,
and in the Why did he choose bats? Well,
they they're very different than we are.
Instead of using
uh eyesight, they use echolocation,
right? They bounce signals off of uh
objects to to move through space.
They also hang upside down most of the
day. Um but we can sort of vaguely
imagine going through the world with
echolocation.
Um whereas
my toaster, I I can't I can't do that. I
don't have a sense of what it's like to
be my toaster.
Um so that formulation, uh is there some
subjective experience going on? I think
that's a very useful formulation.
And
a big question of of consciousness is
what the philosopher David Chalmers has
referred to as the hard problem. Um
Can you tell people what the hard
problem of consciousness is? Sure. The
hard problem is basically how you get
from matter to mind. How you cross that
huge gulf from like neurons to
subjective experience.
No a gulf no one has managed to cross uh
in my view.
Um
Related questions are why doesn't all
the all these things we do go on
automatically? Why do we have to be
aware of anything? Um we could be
completely automated. We could be
zombies. And perhaps get along just
fine.
Um now
a huge percentage of what goes on in
your brain,
let's say 90%, 95%, is unconscious. Um
you know, your brain is is monitoring
your body and making fine adjustments in
the blood gases and the heart rate and
digestion.
There's a lot going on that we don't
have to think about.
So why do we have to think about any of
it? Um and there's some interesting
theories that have been proposed uh
about that. I mean, one is
some of the issues that we have to deal
with can only be have to be decided in a
conscious way that when you have sort of
two competing needs, you know, you're
hungry and you're tired,
which which should take precedence,
which should you deal with?
So consciousness opens up this space of
decision-making.
The other argument would be why we need
to be conscious, why it's useful to be
conscious is we live in a very complex
social world where I have to predict
what you're going to say.
I have to imagine my way into your head
to some extent.
It's it's it you can't automate human
social interaction. It's just got too
many elements and so consciousness is
very helpful in in navigating navigating
that world. Do you think there has been
any real progress made on the hard
problem since 1994? Are we any closer to
an answer there?
>> [laughter]
>> I think we're closer.
There have been some really interesting
theories that have been put forward that
you know, soften the hard problem a
little bit.
Um
and uh
it doesn't I don't think it looms quite
as large but but
a good case could be made that it's not
solvable.
Um that we don't have the kind of
science you would need to solve the hard
problem.
Um and that's because our science is
itself a form of consciousness.
Consciousness is one of the subjects you
cannot get outside of to get an
objective view because every tool we
have to study it is itself a product of
consciousness. So um I mean you see how
complicated this is but your question
about progress
>> [laughter]
>> is you know, I have to admit I was a
little frustrated. I So, I started out
on this journey as one would looking at
the science. Yeah.
>> And of course, surely the scientists can
answer these questions for me. But, I
realized I I looked at these theories
and there are like something like 22
theories of consciousness in play right
now, which
tells you the field is flailing, I
think. Um
but, they would all
edge up to some kind of big conclusion,
but they all started waving their hands
when it came to but, how does a
conscious subject arise?
Um they could take you very far, but
that question they they don't have
answers to. You know, it it uh
seems likely to me that
if regardless of the
source of consciousness, it's it's it's
probably the result of evolutionary
processes. You know, consciousness
evolved to
uh make information available to certain
parts of the brain or to help us
recognize patterns or perceive threats
or
um
you know, sort of a a more uh
complicated uh
uh reason for the evolution of
consciousness might be to uh you know,
help us uh maintain homeostasis, which
is basically like the internal physical
states we need to to stay alive. Um but,
are there any non-evolutionary
arguments for consciousness that are
plausible to you?
Oh, yeah. Um I mean, one is panpsychism.
Oh.
>> [laughter]
>> Panpsych-
panpsychism.
>> Yeah, which can sound bonkers. Yeah. It
can sound bonkers, but panpsychism is
the idea that
everything, every particle, every um
uh you know, the the the ink on the
page, the the the atoms, all have some
infinitesimal
degree of psyche or consciousness. And
somehow, this consciousness uh
is is kind of combined in some way
from our cells and and and and the rest
of our bodies to create this kind of
super consciousness which is us.
Um it sounds kind of crazy, but there's
some very serious people who who believe
in it. You have to you have to expand
your sense of the plausible
when you're
>> [laughter]
>> when you're looking at consciousness,
I'm afraid. But you know, we've done
that before. I mean, how long ago was it
that we discovered electromagnetism? You
know, this crazy idea that there are all
these waves passing through us and
around us that can carry information. I
mean, that's just as mind-blowing,
right? But Michael, can I you know
>> [snorts]
>> I I um
I really love talking about
consciousness. And you know, I I could
happily talk about consciousness uh all
day, but I I find perhaps my uh uh
predilection to doing that might have
something to do with why I don't get a
lot invited to a lot of parties. Um
>> [laughter]
>> but but the you know, often when when I
do talk about consciousness with people
or bring up the subject with people, um
I can tell that that like they they view
thinking about consciousness as almost
akin to a kind of navel-gazing or uh
sort of an interesting thing to think
about, but really what difference
does it ma- does it make to my life? And
what is your response
to that kind of question?
>> Yeah, I thought of I thought a lot about
that, you know, what good is it to think
about consciousness. And I came to think
that it's really important and more
important now than uh ever before. I
mean, consciousness is is being
threatened in certain ways right now.
Or human consciousness as this
exceptional thing. We now have uh we
we're learning scientists are learning
that more and more animals and creatures
going all the way down possibly to
insects uh are conscious. Um so that's
one interesting issue. We're sharing
consciousness with more creatures. And
then the big the big threat, I think, is
AI, uh artificial intelligence, and the
effort to create uh a conscious AI,
which is going to be an enormous
challenge to this question of what does
it mean to be human? Um
What is is is consciousness something
that a machine
can uh possess? Are we more like
intelligent machines or conscious
feeling animals? Who are we? Um so, I
think we're approaching uh this kind of
Copernican moment of redefinition. Well,
I I have a
a lot more questions about uh
AI and and consciousness, but bef-
before I get to those, I I want to know
more about what you think we should do
with that increasing awareness of the
possibility of of uh more animals than
we
perhaps previously thought were
conscious, uh
that they that they too might be
conscious, or that even plants might
have some element of of consciousness.
Uh
because I think, for example, well, you
know, plants
might be conscious, but
>> [snorts]
>> you know, we're not going to stop eating
them. Uh
And then, we can't we can't and then
>> And then, also, um you know, on on the
animal side, I guess the argument would
be that, you know, we should have if if
we recognize animals as being uh
conscious beings,
you know, we should
that would entail a greater amount of
respect for them. But, I think, well,
gosh, we all know human beings are
conscious, and we
exploit the hell out of other human
beings all the time. So, what is reason
is there really to think that an
awareness of animal consciousness would
change our behaviors? Well, that's a
great question. I mean, you know,
there's this whole conversation, very
active here where I live in Silicon
Valley, that if
if AI is conscious, uh then we're going
to have to give it moral consideration.
And uh
well, really? I mean, have we given
moral consideration to one another? Have
we given moral consideration to the
chickens and the and the cattle that we
eat?
And the answer is no. It doesn't
automatically follow.
So, we're going to have to, you know,
we're going to have to sort out the
ethics. I mean, maybe it's around the
ability to suffer. Um
suffering being
being a more kind of full mind process
than mere pain. Um so, maybe that's
where you draw the line. I don't know.
I'm not an ethicist, but
it's not as easy as you're conscious,
therefore you have all these rights. You
know, personhood, who we grant
personhood to is a very subjective human
decision.
We give it to corporations, oddly
enough,
who are not which are not conscious.
But, there's all sorts of creatures we
don't give it to. I I I don't think
we're
entirely rational or consistent in our
granting of
of
moral consideration.
And you are skeptical that AI can
achieve consciousness.
Why is that?
Yeah, I am. Um
I'm convinced by some of the researchers
that I
I follow in the book, including Antonio
Damasio and Mark Solms, who have made a
really compelling case that the origin
of consciousness is with feelings, not
thoughts. There's a tendency to think
that consciousness, which is so, you
know, cool and fancy, is a product of
the cortex, the the um
the evolutionarily most recent part of
the brain, where decision-making,
executive function, all these things
happen.
They make a persuasive case that it
starts with feelings, with the brain's
monitoring of what's going on in the
body. Feelings are the language in which
the body talks to the brain. And the way
the body gets the brain's attention is
with feelings. And this all happens in
the brain stem, not in the cortex. And
they've they've shown that people who
don't even have uh cortexes, or animals
that have been decorticated, it's
called, nevertheless have consciousness.
Um and yet if you turn off certain
structures at the top of the brain stem,
you lose consciousness.
So, that's a different way of thinking
about it. And it suggests that uh our
consciousness
is um uh
depends on embodiment. Uh and more than
that, it depends on these feelings.
So, if you think feelings are at the
center of consciousness, um it's very
hard to imagine how a machine could rise
to that level to have feelings. Um the
other reason I think it it's we're not
close to it is that
everything that machines know, you know,
the data set on which they're
trained, is uh information, most of it
from the you know, that's on the
internet. They don't have friction with
nature. They don't have friction with
the world, with us. Um that real contact
that that depends on embodiment. Some of
the most important things we know are
about person-to-person contact, uh about
contact with nature, um
this friction um that really is what
makes us uh human, I think.
>> Yeah, despite how it see it may seem,
the internet is not actually the whole
of the world. Yes, I know.
>> [laughter]
>> But to a computer, it is. It's it's all
you got. And how would we know if an AI
is conscious or not? Well, how do I know
you're conscious? I mean, these are hard
questions. I mean, I I'm assuming you're
conscious because
>> I am.
>> [laughter]
>> Well, well, your promise is what's
called report ability in philosophy.
>> [laughter]
>> And so you can ask something if it's
conscious and with humans we can kind of
we kind of know. How do I know you're
conscious is really a question I would
have liked to have asked a handful of
people I've interviewed over the years,
but
>> [laughter]
>> Not saying Going forward you can you can
feel free.
Um, so that's it's an enormous problem.
Um, since it is fundamentally a
subjective internal state,
we depend on behaviors that that looks
like conscious behaviors. But if if an
AI tomorrow says,
"Michael, I'm conscious. I promise."
How do we know?
Um, we don't. We we can't say for sure
and that is exactly why people are
falling into deep into these
relationships with So AIs are trained
not to say they're conscious cuz
the the
>> [clears throat]
>> engineers think it's too spooky.
But you can jailbreak that. I mean
there's certain questions you can ask an
AI, especially chat GPT-4, which was the
most
sycophantic of all AIs so far [laughter]
and had to be redrawn.
>> That's why we like it. On the other
hand, that led to a suicide. I mean, you
know, it's a it's a dangerous one and um
uh
So, we we can't say it's not conscious
when it tells us it is. Um, but we can
test it in various ways. You know, it
all goes back to this idea of the Turing
test that, you know, the test of machine
intelligence would be when they can fool
us.
And and that has kind of introduced a
very interesting bit of DNA into the
field, which is
training them to delude us
as as a as an achievement. Not a very
healthy one, but there it is. Also, if
the Turing test is the criteria for
machine consciousness, then it has
already passed the Turing test and
>> It has it has fooled many, many people.
Yeah.
Whether it can fool an expert, too, I
don't know, but probably. So, we're in a
very weird place where the machines
we're living with are telling us they're
conscious. We can't dispute it. But, you
know, we can look at the architecture
and and how they're made and and draw
the kind of conclusions I've drawn, but
is that going to persuade persuade
everybody? No. I mean, we we want them
to be conscious in some way
or some of us do.
There it's easier to have a relationship
with a chatbot than another human. Going
back to that friction point. Um
They they offer no friction. They just
suck up to us and, you know, convince us
how brilliant we are.
And we fall for it.
And
what, if anything, do you think uh
religion or religious thinking has to
offer to questions about consciousness?
That's a good question.
Um
I don't know enough about religion to
make a general statement.
I did This book kind of ends up you
know, on a Buddhist retreat center.
>> Yep. Totally unexpectedly. Um so, I was
I was reading a lot about Buddhism. I
was interviewing Buddhist monks and
thinkers.
And I thought that they had a lot of
wisdom about consciousness. I mean,
Buddhism has been thinking about
consciousness for a very long time.
It has been raising these questions
about the self and giving people tools
to transcend the self. Um which in
itself is a desire that is surprising.
That we, you know, we cling to this ego
so firmly. At the same time, we do a lot
of things to to get away from it.
Whether it's, you know,
extreme sports
or um
psychedelics or meditation.
>> Or watching a movie or having sex or,
you know, any number of things.
>> Yeah, I mean, some of the highest
experiences of of life are these moments
where we transcend the self, and that's
curious, too.
>> Yeah, what do you think that's about?
Why why if we cling to the self are we
also so hungry and and find so much
enjoyment in losing ourselves?
I think the self isolates us. Um the ego
builds walls around it, you know,
whether it's that we're special or we're
hurt or we're, you know, we're
it it it's constantly evaluating its
standing, it ruminates. I mean, there's
a lot of like crappy stuff about the
self. Yeah, it's all just yammering
constantly. Yes, and there it is that
voice in our head, and it embodies
critical voices very often, inherited
from parents sometimes or or other
people. Um
So, I mean, the ego is very useful. It
gets a lot done. It, you know, got my
book done. It gets your podcast done.
So, we shouldn't, you know,
be too critical of it. On the other
hand, um
these when we when we transcend the
self, we connect to things larger than
ourselves. And, you know, this is one
this is one of the beautiful things
about psychedelics when they work is
this sense of
dissolution of self. And the interesting
thing that happens when your self
dissolves
is that the walls come down, and you
feel part of nature, you feel love, you
feel um
uh I mean, I had an experience of I I
describe in the book of self-dissolution
where I merged with this piece of music,
this Bach unaccompanied cello suite. And
it was such a profound experience of of
music because the subject object split
went away and I and I was identical to
this piece of music. Um so some of the
the great experiences of life are when
the ego
uh goes away or or just is
shrunken a little bit. The interesting
thing though is that consciousness
doesn't go away when the ego goes away.
And that, you know, we protect our ego
cuz we're kind of afraid if we lose it,
we're dead. But we're not. It's just one
voice. There's a lot else going on uh as
you learn when you meditate and as you
learn when you use psychedelics.
Um how often do you do psychedelics?
Oh, not very often at all. Um you know,
it's hard to find time.
>> [laughter]
>> It's a It's a big day with a lot of
preparation and everything. But
[laughter]
if I can do it once a year, I'm really
happy, but it doesn't always happen. And
and what I'm talking about too is is
ideally a guided experience, which I
find is
much more useful um and you can you can
let yourself go when someone's, you
know, watching your body.
Um
so when I can put myself in that
situation, which isn't easy to do and
it's expensive, um I find that very
valuable. Still, I mean, I'm still
learning things. What what are you
learning?
Oh, I you know, I
Every psychedelic experience is
different. You never go back to the same
place and that's why I think it's a
great thing to do on your birthday
uh or around your birthday, you know, to
sort of take stock um of of your reality
and
what's going on and what what the issues
are.
Um I mean, I had an experience not too
long ago that um
uh kind of rocked me.
Um it wasn't a pleasant experience at
all. What was it?
Um I It was a guided trip on um
Well, it doesn't matter what it was on
and um
uh I had these uh
powerful emotions
that had no name.
They were just emotions and they were
like these giant blimps uh crashing into
me, crashing into each other and I was
straining and so frustrated that I
didn't I didn't know what they were.
And and the answer never came clear
during the experience, but
all I could do and I and I knew that,
you know, you can't resist these things.
So, I just felt them and they didn't
feel good, but they felt strong.
Um and oddly enough
>> [snorts]
>> they um
the answer to who to what they were came
2 weeks later when I happened to be at a
meditation retreat.
And there the links between psychedelics
and meditation are just very fruitful
and interesting. And um I was doing a
walking meditation after a couple days
of complete silence and like 12 hour a
day of meditating.
And there were the blimps.
And in sans serif letters right on the
blimp was the word fear.
And um uh I very quickly realized what
it was and it was it was fear of losing
some people very close to me.
And um uh
So, the combination of two experiences
ended up being very productive, but
on its own the psychedelic experience
raised more questions than than than it
gave answers.
You know, I I realize we're uh right on
the line if not over it for uh
what might cause other people listening
to this or watching this to think like
who are these two lunatics I'm talk uh
listening [laughter] to. But but uh my
my sort of crazy person subject that I'd
like like to raise with you um has to do
with the ways in which thinking about
consciousness can be destabilizing.
Um, so you know, I I I uh
maybe like I alluded to earlier, I you
know, I think questions of of
consciousness, which are really
questions about like what makes us us,
are are some of the most important
and fruitful questions that can be
asked. But at the same time, you know,
you can start to ask those questions and
then you get into questions about uh
it
is there uh some self, some some David,
is there some stable I that I uh
exists or not or um you know,
what is the relationship between
free will and consciousness? And um
you know, sometimes I think, well,
actually I don't want to think about
those questions anymore because it it it
[laughter] can make just getting through
the day kind of uh uh difficult and and
you could also perhaps arise arrive at
some answers that,
you know,
you might not be happy about, that might
seem dehumanizing. Um,
but am I am I is that just me? Do you
Do you have similar
apprehensions about the subject? I think
it can be destabilizing. Um, absolutely.
You know, we've learned I mean, we know
how psychedelics can destabilize people.
One of the reasons people are
happy to be less conscious and fill
their attention with distractions of all
kinds and drugs of all kinds is because
the mind can be a scary place to visit,
our own minds. And um
uh we often want to be
uh less aware of what's going on,
especially people who've suffered trauma
and things like that. But but you know,
people who haven't, too. So yeah,
there's no question. But I have to tell
you, I don't think about consciousness
24/7.
>> [laughter]
>> Right.
Um, there's there's time where I'm just
watching TV.
>> [laughter]
>> Who is the I
Watching Matlock.
>> this show? [laughter]
Yeah. So, but I I I totally agree and
that there are um yeah, there there
reasons people
um avoid these kind of um
you know, going down these rabbit holes.
Um so, yeah, and it takes
uh
a willingness to to risk something to
think hard about consciousness.
Michael, thank you so much for taking
all the time to speak with me today. I I
really enjoyed it.
>> I was so pleased that you were happy to
go down all these
>> [laughter]
>> challenging rabbit holes.
Um and and I'll talk to you again soon.
Yes, I think next week.
>> [music]
>> On the interview, we talked to our guest
twice. So, about a week later, Michael
and I spoke again.
>> [music]
>> We got into the current political
moment, including how nutrition science
informs his views of RFK Jr. [music] and
the MAHA movement.
Michael, I'm glad to be speaking with
you again.
Yeah, likewise. Uh so, I here at the at
the start I want to change direction a
bit from our first conversation and talk
about something related to your earlier
work. Um So, I think to a to a lot of
people you're maybe still best known as
a food writer. And you have that uh
highly sensible
uh mantra about eating and that's eat
food, not too much, mostly plants.
And um
I'm curious to know what you make of
the skepticism
on the part of uh you know, RFK Jr. and
the MAHA movement about conventional
wisdom around nutrition. Well, I mean,
RFK's version would be, you know, eat
food,
probably not too much, uh mostly meat.
Um I think the big takeaway of the uh
new food guidelines was its promotion of
meat and saturated fat uh for which
there's no scientific evidence that
we're not getting enough. Um we're
getting plenty of protein. Um so, once
you've given up on science as guiding
you uh anything goes. Which is not to
say nutrition science has always been
accurate. Um I think that it's a pretty
imperfect science, but there's certain
things I think we can we can uh rely on
when, you know, a great many studies
implicate um
meat and you know, red meat especially.
The other thing that it completely
overlooks is that these decisions are
not just about our health. Uh the
environmental implications of eating
more red meat are are enormous.
Uh uses incredible amount of resources,
incredibly wasteful way to feed
ourselves. Takes 10 lb of grain to get 1
lb of meat. uh beef. Um
So, you know, I don't I don't find these
that helpful. I don't think they'll
change uh much of anything.
Which is not to say I don't think MAHA
has uh
could have a positive impact. There's
the potential of a very interesting new
alliance. Uh
you know, there are overlaps between the
old food movement and MAHA movement
around pesticides, around
ultra-processed foods. So, um maybe
there's a new politics being born here.
Um
Although I have to say, you know, eating
real food is not going to protect you
from the measles.
Um and you you have to take everything
that RFK Jr. is doing to public health
in its entirety. Uh and I I I fear that
more people will die because of his
vaccine ideas than will be saved because
of his food ideas. Well, I I I have a a
question about what uh guidance or
advice you might have for people um
about how to deploy skepticism when it
comes to uh institutions or authorities.
It seems like it might be difficult to
say to people, "Hey, you know, maybe you
can trust RFK Jr. on X, but don't trust
him on Y." That seems like maybe a hard
move for people to make. So,
like how do you know where to direct
your skepticism? Well, you know, I have
a certain advantage because I'm a
journalist and I get to call up people
and I can ask them, "How confident are
you about this result?" Um and though,
you know, scientists
in print are very definitive and
confident, in person, they're much more
they're much more reluctant to to take
hard positions. And they'll say, "Well,
you know, this is a limited study. This
is what we know now." So,
I guess I see science science as a much
more um equivocal uh discourse than many
people do. And I think scientists
sometimes are kind of
uh
I don't know.
You know, I mean, they they have so much
authority in our culture or did until
it's being dismantled [laughter]
right now.
Um that I think they overdid their
confidence to people um because I guess
they felt equivocal messages didn't
didn't pan out or didn't get them
headlines. So, I you know, as a as a
consumer tip, I don't really have
anything except to
uh you know, don't be overwhelmed by the
first-day story, which applies to
everything, right? You read in the
paper. Um
the the second- and third-day stories
sometimes um qualify things. Um
and read more widely um
and and look for um you know, comments
on the science and not just the that
first-day story.
Um Sorry I don't have a more satisfying
answer.
>> [laughter]
>> that's
okay. It's It's a real but it's a real
problem and and it creates the
vulnerability that RFK Jr. is stepping
into. I I want to uh turn back to the
the new book uh now.
We talked earlier about the
um
a- about the idea of of
being skeptical about a a stable self.
Um
and you know, I
apologize if this seems like a like a
woo-woo question or or is too
airy-fairy, but do do you think the
absence of a self
also means the absence of something like
a soul?
Do you believe in a soul?
Well, if a soul is something that
is indestructible and survives our
death,
no.
Um but I c- I can't say that or anything
else about the afterlife with any
confidence.
>> [laughter]
>> Um there's a lot of
you know, there are a lot of people who
seriously believe otherwise. So, to the
extent a soul is associated with that
idea, I don't. I think that
consciousness has become our kind of
secular substitute for the soul. And we
talk about consciousness the way
uh people in the 17th century talked
about souls or 16th century talked about
souls. And and some of people's interest
in it is the fact that maybe it floats
free of these mortal bodies and does
something or gets folded into a uh a
collective consciousness um after we're
gone. Um
so, I I think there is a kind of
hidden religiosity or spirituality in
the whole conversation around
consciousness and and people's interest
in it.
Um
you know, somebody asked me uh recently,
you know, do you think p- as people get
older, are they more interested in
consciousness?
Uh and I would say probably yes, and
probably for that reason. It's
interesting for me because it does seem
that that
many of us do have
uh, consistencies to our our ourselves
that are a little hard to explain uh,
in the absence of something like a
stable identity or or a soul. You know,
in the book you you mention uh, a period
in your teenage years
uh, when you were reading Herman Hesse,
writing bad bad poetry, and thinking
about the big questions. Um, I don't
know if you still write bad but you
know, the other two things don't seem
that far away from from what you're
doing now at in your 70s. So, so what to
you might explain
what seem like intrinsic core qualities
that are constant for you through time
if not
uh, a self, a stable self-identity, or a
soul?
Yeah, so even though I talk a lot about
the this idea that maybe the so the self
is an illusion, um,
it it still has a reality of certain
kind. I mean, it a conventional reality.
The fact that I'm using myself to talk
to yourself makes this very easy. If if
I if neither of us had selves right now,
it would be a very kind of loosey-goosey
conversation. I don't I can't even
imagine what it would be like. I mean,
um,
uh, Matthew uh, Ricard said, you know,
it's like a river has a name, and that
conventional name is very useful, but
there's nothing consistent there. It's
just water passing. Um, uh, so I think
we have to make that distinction. But, I
also say in the book at various times, I
don't have a self yet. I can make things
happen, and and there is an I that feels
it's making things happen. So, even if
it's an illusion or a construct of
consciousness, it has it's it's real
enough. But, where do you think those
core feelings come from? Everyday people
do things, and they have some feeling
inside themselves that that says
something like this doesn't feel right
to me. This doesn't feel wrong. This
doesn't feel like who I am.
What is that who I am?
>> that is memory. I mean I mean time. I
talk in the end of the book about the
importance of time to the construction
of self.
It is the fact that you have this whole
history of experiences
uh and this uh these objectives or
aspirations about the future. And it is
that line in which you situate yourself.
There's someone in the book who has a
very interesting idea about self uh and
memory, which is Michael Levin, the
biologist, who's a brilliant biologist
at um
at Tufts. And he talks about mnemonic
improvisation, I think is what he calls
it. And his his idea is that our
memories are constantly being rewritten.
Every time we take out a memory and put
it back, it's a little different. This
seems like a bug, but he's telling us
it's a feature. This is how we construct
ourselves by taking memories and
changing them in some ways. And by the
way, computers don't do this all the
time. Uh if they did, we'd throw them
out. If they if they changed their
memory all the time, and you opened a
file and you're like, "Wait a minute,
this is not the way I wrote it." Um so,
I think that we are hacking our memory
constantly to help construct the self
that is useful to us now. Uh and and he
he basically says that's what maybe
that's what consciousness is. Is is
someone using experience to construct a
self.
And I think that's a uh very provocative
idea. I don't know if it's true, but
it's provocative.
And you know, I I know I brought um
something like this next question up
when we spoke before, but I I want to
ask it again or ask a a version of it
again. So, you know, this morning I was
looking at the news, and I'm thinking,
gosh, is is coming back to talk to
Michael Pollan about consciousness? Am I
doing some you know, how many angels can
dance on on the head of a pin style
conversation
right now and um
I decided the answer was no and it is it
is important.
>> [laughter]
>> I'm glad to hear it.
Do you ever have those have those
doubts?
You know, I did at various points when I
was starting on this book and the world
was starting to fall apart in various
ways and like, you know, is this how I
should be using my energy? There's
political work to be done and I do do
political work in other parts of my
life, but I also think that
consciousness is
at stake in a lot of what's going on. I
mean, one of the things Trump has done
is occupied a significant chunk of our
attention every single day
and that our consciousness is is being
polluted in a certain way and um
uh
and he's he's a master at it and I think
protecting ourselves against that at the
same time we preserve the ability to um
act politically.
Uh is is a is a difficult balancing act.
You know, we talked last time about the
need to protect consciousness that it it
it's a very precious realm. It's the
realm of our privacy and our freedom,
our freedom to think. So, I think we
need some kind of consciousness hygiene
particularly at this moment where um
this one politician in particular has
figured out ways to command our
attention. Um so
yeah, I think consciousness is more
relevant now as something to think about
um protect, nurture
than
than even it was 10 or 20 years ago. Um
Michael, thank you so much for taking
all the time to talk with me. I I really
appreciated it I I really enjoyed the
book very much.
Thank you. Thanks. This is very
provocative conversations.
I'm Lulu Garcia-Navarro. And I'm David
Marchese. [music] And we're the hosts of
the interview, an audio and video
podcast from The New York Times. Every
week we interview fascinating and
influential people from all walks of
life. Subscribe to our YouTube channel
[music] so you'll never miss an episode.